---
title: Evangelisation in Opus Dei
description: A look at evangelisation in Opus Dei
---

{% section .hero %}
# Evangelisation in Opus Dei
## Personal context
One of the biggest points of criticism for Opus Dei is how they find and recruit new members. As it turns out I happened to have a different experience with Opus Dei that even members would have been used to. Because I was newly involved with a bunch of Catholic things around where I live, I got invited to 'student recollection'. Student recollections are short retreats for students. There's usually some prayer, a meditation guided by the priest, some benediction and then beers and food. I can't remember how or when, but someone gave me a copy of 'the way' by the founder Jose Maria Escriva. I more or less dropped most contact with Opus Dei after that. Still friends with one of the guys who was in Opus Dei, but I didn't really have any interest in it. The Way was interesting because it essentially spoke a much more informal and modern tone than all of the other holy books I'd read. At the time I was considering being a monk, friar, priest or getting married. My considerations at the time were ‘clerical’ in a way. They were influenced by the dominant strain of Catholicism. The routes that you went were the traditional ones. Monasticism is seen as a higher calling. Some of this is more formal in theology. Some other parts of it might be for the need of physical signs to show commitment. Either way, it was typical for many people in Catholicism to be very ‘holy holy’. After some point this was something I wanted to move away from.

Before I joined, I had a copy of the book ‘the way’. This was given to me by a member of Opus Dei that I met and suggested to read if I wanted to know more. After that most of what I read about Opus Dei was online. The appeal wasn’t strictly in the negative attention, but more in the way it was phrased. None of the criticism seemed to me as very strong, and there was a good chance things weren’t as they seemed. This is especially the case around things such as celibacy or how money is dealt with by members. It appealed because it was an organisation in Catholicism that seemed to offer a more palatable type of Christianity. You had to do some of these other weird things, but you also didn’t have to renounce all of the things you already do or liked doing. I tried to become a Dominican Friar for a short time, but I had to wait a year and soon grew disinterested. After some time probing around the organisation and reading about it I asked to join. I think I told the one person I knew there of my intentions and he was sort of shocked. You have to be around the organisation for some time at least before you can join. So I started to go to more of the events, read more etc. 
 
I won't go into more detail around all of my experiences. Eventually I was offered to stay in a University residence, but I had barely any way of paying for it. I eventually worked something out without them in terms of cost and I moved in. It was maybe around 2/3 months after I moved in that I 'whistled'. Something that members will usually remember and celebrate the anniversary of.
 
## Context of the organisation
Opus Dei had grown massively in the 20th century. Its membership was nearly 100,000 by the time I joined. I joined as a numerary in the organisation. The numbers of members aren't officially published, but the estimate that about 20% of the ~100k members are celibate numerary members, is probably about right. I don't even know the numbers in my country. There had been 3 people to join as numeraries in the space of 5 years. Before that, there was about a 15 year gap before an Irish numerary whistled. There was probably another 10 year gap before that, but that's just an estimate. The point being that Opus Dei in Ireland had a large number of members that joined 25-50 years ago and then very very few members since. This isn't the case everywhere. There are some regions around the world where membership is growing. But in the western nations, this trend is repeated. 

The spirit of evangelisation in Opus Dei isn’t new. It's essentially core to Christianity and the gospel. Members have high buy-in and want to share that with others. I’ve heard push-back against this before. That people should face no coercion whatsoever. Like pacifists in a deontological war. I have not had a problem with this though.
As an organisation grows, reversion towards the mean seems likely. If every person joined Opus Dei, how would it be exceptional as an organisation? This is a fundamental question for so many people starting organisations they want to last. But perhaps Opus Dei reverted to the mean too quickly? Members seemed to be less effective. Less focussed on larger visions for the organisation. Perhaps a lack of charisma that can be so compelling that others join because of it. The organisation became more of a target at the same time. Members might have been less likely to say out loud that they were a member. Accusations of abuse within Catholicism as a whole did not help.(Although Opus Dei hasn't had many problems with these types of allegations). Perhaps the new liberties in the west meant far more competition for the best and brightest and that it is no fault of Opus Dei’s at all. Opus Dei was once a new organisation, and that newness was interesting. But after some point it failed to be a new thing, and more of a weird old thing. People's levels of curiosity about the world can change much quicker than organisations like Opus Dei can adapt. I suspect that modern interest in Catholicism is more due to its relative newness. Its ideas being essentially undiscovered for many young people in the west, presents the opportunity to find some new passion all over again. 

If Jose Maria Escriva was working in tech, he probably would have been a charismatic leader. He had a temper that he tried a lot of his life to keep in control. He showed a lot of affection and care for all the people in his organisation. He started and built an organisation that was way ahead of its time. He was told Opus Dei was centuries too early. In so many ways he was a rebel. This combination of curiosity, drive and charisma is what we seem to see in so many cases of exceptional people and in the organisations they build. Had Jose Maria not started Opus Dei, he might have gone on to other things just as great. The same could be said for Álvaro del Portillo and other founding members. They sacrificed a lot of possible prestige for the sake of Opus Dei. And the reward for their efforts was large growth.
At some point, the members of Opus Dei reverted to the mean. While you can’t use the criteria of new member growth to measure the ‘quality’ of members, it is a somewhat helpful proxy. Of course global membership might have continued to grow, but in established areas these numbers began to slow. However it’s difficult to distinguish between the methods of evangelisation. It’s possible that founding members of Opus Dei were more coercive. And it’s this type of coercion that most people have trouble with. They seemed to be in general more exceptional, and therefore more attractive to join. Yet mid stage members of the Opus Dei might have been less inclined towards this form of coercion. I’ll try to revisit this topic at some point later.


The Founding members might have been:
- High in openness to experience: The concept of Opus Dei, passionately loving the world, and being a saint in the daily activities of your life was a wholly new thing in Catholicism. To go along with this idea meant being open to new ways of thinking about what a Christian could be. Opus Dei had a similar (not identical) charisma to protestantism in the 16th and 17th Centuries. Even in the 20th Century, Catholicism that came remotely close to protestant ways of thinking, was looked at with some suspicion.
- High in conscientiousness: There were many complicated and mundane tasks in the foundation of Opus Dei. The implementation of the status of personal prelature was not easy. They were dealing with church bureaucracy and clericalism, which they successfully navigated to achieve their goal. 
- Average in extraversion (There were perhaps more extraverted members, but I don't think extraversion was pure reason these people attracted new members)
- Low in agreeableness: A lot of the early members had a vision for Opus Dei in their mind, and it would have been difficult for them to have been coerced off this vision. These older members tended to have a **fiery** personality. Jose Maria being one example. 
- Low in neuroticism: Founding members of Opus Dei were from an older generation, so compared to future members they were more rugged. Compared to the general population I’m not so sure. But I imagine going about with good spirits during civil wars, persecution and isolation is more indicative or being internally rugged even for people of their time.
 
(They practised their duties in the middle of wars and shipped themselves off to the middles of nowhere)
 
In Contrast, the middle stage members might have been:
- Low in openness to experience: More conventional in general. Less likely to try new things. Preferring beige colour schemes, not as considerate of newer forms of art.
- High in conscientiousness: More diligent than perhaps the founding members. But also perhaps a boring type of diligence. Conscientiousness might have been bounded by lower ambition in some cases.
- Average in extraversion: I don’t see a reason why on average the people in Opus Dei would have been any more or less socially extroverted.
- Average in agreeableness(possibly bi-modal on the high end): The social pressures a person faces when taking some action are relative. Mid stage members of Opus Dei may have had family members, friends and people in their wider community also in Opus Dei. But there were many members in different countries without supportive communities. There is going to be a more disagreeable profile of people joining Opus Dei where it is new, even if the majority come from a more supportive background.
- Average in neuroticism: The distribution was normal. There were still people, rugged enough internally, to head off to Africa solo and start opus dei there. But my guess is that the average Opus Dei member wasn't much different from the wider population in this regard.



{% /section  %}
